Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lob. And
today I'm joined for a second time by Dr
Azim Sharif. He's professor and Canada research chair at
the University of British Columbia in Canada. And today
we're talking about cultural differences in how people react
to robots A I and so on robot preachers,
people's belief in free will and the political ramifications
of that. Why people love rags to riches stories,
causal attributions to poverty, the moralization of effort and
some other related topics. So, Doctor Sharif, welcome back
to the show. It's always a pleasure to talk
to you.
Oh, it's great to be here, Ricardo. I, you
know, I was looking at the all the interviews
that you've done in apparently the five years uh
since we last talked and you have built such
an incredible corpus of interviews. I think you have
probably had in depth conversations with a wider range
of interesting psychologists and social scientists than anyone on
the planet, which is a thing, right? I mean,
I think I can't think of somebody who's done
more than that.
Well, I, I mean, I don't know, but I
thank you very much for that kind of words.
Well, what makes me think here, here's what it
makes me wonder. Um, YOU have these conversations on
a weekly basis you're talking to really interesting people.
Uh You must synthesize a lot of really interesting
points and I'd be curious about what the kind
of uh synthesis you're making. What kind of summaries,
what kind of connections you're making between all of
these? Have you thought about doing some of you,
like producing something of your own? Like maybe uh
so a couple ways you, you could do this
and, and we'll get into talking about um my
research eventually. But uh for one, you could cut
interviews topically. So you bring, say you had a
um a topic of cultural evolution and you, you
bring all the different cultural evolution people you talk
to and like do, do little clips. Alternatively, you
could produce some sort of like book or, or
your own lectures that were based on bringing these
insights together and you can have little clips of,
of many of the interviews. I mean, I think
you probably have in your head right now. Uh
JUST a, an unrivaled amount of psychological knowledge.
Well, uh le let's see if uh some A
I tools in the near future will help me
with that because with the enormous amount of content
I already have just thinking about going to the
hundreds of interviews and clipping them and then putting
it together. I mean, it's, it's just a nightmare
in my head. So hopefully a I will help
here. So, uh in the near future. So, but,
but thank you so much for the suggestions, by
the way. Uh AND so to get into the
topics here today. Uh Yeah, I know. II, I
mean, you study a broad, broad range of topics,
but let's get into some of the work you've
done on how people uh react and deal with
robots, algorithms, artificial intelligence because it seems that there
are cultural differences here,
right? Yeah. So one of the things that we
see is that uh most of this research tends
to be put out and most of the discussion
of this tends to be put out as most
things tend to be put up by the United
States, the United States as well as Canada where
I live. Um TEND to be outliers in terms
of their fear of A I. Uh If you
look across the world, other countries tend to be
much more embracing of it. Um And so, uh
I think a lot of the discourse is probably
dominated by an unrepresented, un unrepresentative fear of uh
uh a global fear of A I that probably
doesn't exist everywhere.
Uh And so, but what are some of the
cultural differences that you found? And what cultures did
you study particularly?
Well, we've, we've looked at it in a few
different ways. Um, I think the biggest differences and
maybe the most interesting differences emerged between, uh, the
West and East Asia. Um, AND when I say
the west, I mean, I guess I could say
even more, more specifically North America and East Asia.
Um, YOU see, as I mentioned, the most fear
and worry in, uh, in the US and Canada
and you see much, much less in East Asia,
you see much more, uh, willingness to engage with
social robots, you see much more willingness to engage
with uh uh chatbot buddies. Um uh So a
lot of the things which freak people out in
the US seem to be just fine in, in
places like Japan, China, Korea.
Uh And why is it that uh we find
these differences? I mean, where is it in the
culture of people from East Asia that make them
more receptive to these kinds of technologies than people
in North America, for example.
Yeah. So we've, this is work that was led
by um Yan Kai Chi. Uh HE goes by
Sam. So com Sam. Um WE, we can only
speculate about various reasons for this. Um But I
think there are some interesting kind of foundational cultural
differences which then get exaggerated through a sort of
positive feedback loop, right? So you have a what
could be a, a potentially pretty small cultural difference
which then leads to different levels of exposure, right?
So historically, the, well, let's OK. So there's there's
some religious differences, right? So, in, in uh Buddhism
and Shintoism, there's more of an embracing of animism.
Whereas in, say the Abrahamic religions, there's, it's very
centered on human exceptionalism, right? It's, it's much more
about separating humans from all the other creatures of
the world and putting humans on this, this interesting
pedestal. So that can lead to a bit of
a uh a competition between humans and any other
types of creatures where other types of creatures including
like, you know, we here maybe in, in um
North America, think about the terminator as a anthropomorphic
uh quintessentially terrible uh robot. Whereas what you tend
to see in terms of these social robots in
East Asia are kind of like cuddly robot, like
like ro robotic seals and, and things like that,
which um they seem much more willing to embrace
potentially because of this connection, this, this willingness to
embrace animism than a more animated world to see
uh agency among animals. Um Now, that could be
a very small difference which then leads to, as
I mentioned, uh a few changes in terms of
how fiction portrays these robots, you know, the terminator
versus Astro boy and that could lead to then
uh a difference in the exposure. So, so in,
in Japan, you had social robots quite a bit
earlier. Uh PEOPLE have been exposed to them, people
who are, you know, my age or your age
now have grown up within their whole lives, uh
which means that, that they're much more comfortable with
them entirely. And so that can kind of lead
to these positive feedback loops which draws the cultures
in, in different directions.
That that's actually very interesting because I'm a big
anime and manga fan and follower. And I, I
mean, I've been following it for 10 plus years
and you see, even in this sort of artistic
mediums out, people in Japan tend to be much
more receptive to technological innovations and how even sometimes
they tend to think about them as just part,
even of the natural environment. I mean, it's something
that humans create but they look at them more
in a more natural way than people in the
west, I guess.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, THERE'S a, there's a few other
explanations, right? So, in another project, um, unpublished uh
project right now, we've been looking at how fear
of A I uh relates to people's belief about
how well, uh about the capacities for A I
for placing particular jobs, right. So you can imagine
that one of the jobs that you probably, uh,
that I probably wouldn't want an A I to
do though there's some, maybe exceptions to this is,
is being a judge, having the, the moral decision
making. Um, AND, and most people around the world
have some hesitancy about, about a, is taking over
the, the role of judges or of religious leaders
or whatever. Um, BUT it does vary between countries.
And the, the variation between countries seems to be
explained by a belief that, well, actually the requirements
of such a job uh are not outside of
the requirement of the abilities of a, of a
particular uh A I or robot. And the more
you see the A I able to fulfill those
positions, the less you tend to fear A I
and so big a big difference for this is,
is in Japan versus in, say the United States
care workers. Japan sees a is or robots to
be very uh capable of, of breaching the requirements
of being a care worker. Whereas in the United
States, that's not the case. Uh And that seems
to correspond to the country's uh uh fear of
A I as well. And there's another um interesting
uh this is not my paper, this is Noah
Costello I think, did this really interesting study where
he found that uh people from more corrupt countries,
countries with higher levels of corruption uh have uh
less algorithm aversion. So they're less averse to algorithms,
making decisions for them rather than the humans themselves.
Um And that makes sense if you think that,
well, I trust humans because I trust them to
be able to make complex moral decisions. But if
I'm coming from a place where, well those moral
decisions tend to be made in very corrupt ways,
then I'm po potentially going to trust the algorithm
that it uh it is more fair minded or
more objective in terms of its decisions, less willing
to give into favoritism. Humans are flawed in that
way. Maybe the algorithms wouldn't be. Uh, SO you
do see that cultural variation as well.
Well, I, I guess that in that case people
would prefer algorithms if they are not corrupt themselves,
otherwise they probably would prefer to deal with other
people. Right.
That's right. So, and, and, and furthermore, the, the
beneficiaries of corruption are probably gonna prefer the humans
or the corrupt algorithms above more fair minded ones
as well.
A and so you mentioned something there that uh
in regards to people who occupy certain positions and
something that you've done work on is about robot
preachers. So, what results did you get there? And
what implications would it have to cultural evolutionary theories
of religion?
Yeah. So this was um a another study that
involved Sam and, and, and Josh Jackson. Um YOU
should speak to Josh if you haven't already. I
don't know if you have um where we did
a couple of experiments um field experiments. First one
was in a Buddhist temple in Japan uh where
we looked at people who had visited. They have
this interesting robot preacher called Minar um that exists
in a, in a pretty well known old Buddhist
temple uh which creates an interesting juxtaposition. And you
have um we looked at people who had, who
had heard a sermon delivered by mind versus a
human preacher. And then we looked at um how
willing they were to donate to the temple. Uh
AND, and um other measures of support for the
religion or the temple. And then another study and
this was a more controlled experiment. This was in
a temple in Singapore. We uh uh randomly assigned
on, well, not randomly assigned. We had, we had
on different days, we had a robot preacher appear
or not. Um So that was a, a more
controlled experiment in terms of who got the humans
and who got, who got the uh preachers. And
again, measured things like willingness to donate, willingness to
share flyers about their religion to spread the word
of the religion, uh et cetera. Uh And what
we found there, I probably won't surprise many, which
is that when people engaged with a uh a
robot preacher, they showed less support. Um They, they
gave, they were willing to give less to their,
to their uh temple. Um They were less willing
to spread the word of the religion. It, it
decreased their commitment to the religion. And the, the
result I, I don't think is super surprising, but
I think what's interesting is the theory that surrounds
it, right? Why, why is it that we would
react differently in the context of religious leaders to
uh robot preachers versus human preachers? And as we're
thinking about this, one of the things that we,
we, you know, talked about was that a lot
of the discussion about what jobs, uh, robots and
A I can take over and which ones they
can't, uh, seem to be focused on the current,
uh, capabilities of the robot. And what's interesting about
that is that what we've seen over the last,
I guess, 15 months, is that the capabilities of
A I are just expanding so rapidly that it's,
that's an ever shrinking, uh, a space of things,
right? Um Even when you see the the modern
robots that they're able to engage in, in surprisingly
nimble fine motor patterns. Um So, so in terms
of capabilities that the jobs that uh A I
don't have the capability to do are are shrinking,
but we were looking at a separate thing instead
of looking at capability, we were looking at at
credibility. And I think this capability, credibility distinction is
interesting because credibility depends on more than just your
ability to improve the technology of um uh of
A I for credibility. It seems to rely on
um something about what the uh uh the the
person who's passing on the information to you uh
has experienced or is as a person. And so
this, this uh digs into cultural evolutionary theories, dual
inheritance theories about the fact that when we get
ideas or when we uh absorb rituals or um
different norms and practices, values, beliefs, morals. Um WE
do so not solely based on the content, it's
not simply what the content of the ritual is
that, that determines whether we accept it to what
degree. Um, IT also depends greatly on the, the
context and in particular, uh, the person who's delivering
it to us, the person who's telling us about
the ritual or trying to teach it to us
or trying to pass on the, the, the moral,
uh, pass on the, um, sermon or whatever. And,
uh, there are various things which increase the credibility
of the, uh, the person passing it on. Um,
uh Joe Henri has talked about these in the
context of uh credibility enhancing displays. There's various things
which the credibility, um, and the canonical example of
what a credibility enhancing display is, is, is something
that it would be very, um, it would be
costly to the, uh uh to the model, the
cultural model if they didn't actually believe it. Um
And so a, if a, if a cultural model,
like a, an elder or something is, uh, uh
trying to get you to eat a blue mushroom
and they eat the blue mushroom themselves, that's a
very credibility enhancing display. Uh Because if that, if
they didn't believe that that mushroom uh was safe,
they wouldn't eat it themselves. Uh Now, in order
to have this credibility, you have to have some
sort of level of mind uh to actually believe
in what you're doing, uh which a is don't
have as far as we know. Um And, or
uh some ability to suffer for the consequences. And
again, as far as we know, a, I don't,
don't yet suffer. And so without those abilities, without
things that you see for, um, uh, among religious
leaders, like, say, uh, a priest who, um, uh,
are celibate for life, that's a pretty credibility enhancing
display. They're going to a lot of expense to
show that they are somebody who firmly believes in,
in the religion. Uh, Those things aren't gonna affect
it. Uh, AN A I, they're not gonna be,
they're, they're not gonna be credibility enhancing if you,
if you say, oh, well, this preacher never had
sex in their life. You know, it's like, no,
that doesn't tell me much about them.
That, that, that's very interesting. And, and by the
way, just out of curiosity, these robot preachers, I
mean, can they perform a mess?
Well, yeah, so they, they can, now it's not,
it's not as charismatic and elegant and even fluid,
uh as, as a human would, would do. But
the point about the capabilities is, well, that's a,
that's a gap that can be easily closed. Uh
So at some point, possibly soon they will be
able to do this charismatic and, and uh uh
fluidly as a human, but that credibility gap probably
won't be closing. And you can see that not
just for Rob robot preachers, but you can see
that in other, um, and other uh uh professions
where credibility matters as well, and so, um, one
that I think about a lot and I find
really interesting. My wife is a psychiatrist. Um, AND
so in the, in the realm of therapy, uh,
there has been some, uh, uh, a lot of
progress with, uh, therapy chat bots, uh, because they
can rapidly, uh, or, or massively expand the, they,
they reduce the cost and massively expand the number
of people who, who can have access to therapy
and for some reasons, uh, for some, yeah, for
some functions, they've been shown to be very effective.
But what they don't have, what they don't have
is is the credibility and that might be a
limiting, uh, uh, factor for how effective they can
actually be. Uh, Ricardo. Have you seen Good Will
hunting? Yes. Yes. I think most people have seen
good will hunting most. Hopefully most of your audience
has seen Good Will hunting. But one of the
interesting things about that is you have the Matt
Damon character who's incredibly capable, right? This disturbed genius.
And then you have the, um, Robin Williams character,
the, the therapist who is not as smart as
Matt Damon, right? Like Matt Damon goes through all
these therapists because he's just, he can outsmart them
and they're, they're, he's much more capable than they
are at any intellectual feat. And eventually what you
see is that, well, the Robin Williams character has
this credibility. He has this credibility because he has
this depth of feeling he has this experience of,
of, of being in the war and then having
his, his wife die of cancer. And he's this
deep feeler and that credibility is what ultimately gets
to Matt Damon and ends up helping him.
Yeah. No, no, that's very interesting. And I guess
that in the case of chat bots to help
with mental health, perhaps to, uh, benefits that they
would have in comparison to human psychotherapists or someone
like that is that they would have more readily
access to uh a bigger amount of data from
the patient and also better memory, I guess in
terms of what the patients have and all of
that.
That's right. That's right. And there's a third benefit
which is that um they're not human, uh which
means that they don't come with all the judgment
or the uh uh uh a perceived judgment that
a human comes with. So people might be more
willing to admit things or talk about things with
a nonhuman chat bot than they would with an
actual human therapist as, as empathetic and, and um
a good listener as they are.
So, let's get into another topic. Now, where do
people's belief or lack thereof in free will comes
from?
Yeah, good question. So, I mean, 101 answer to
that question would be uh uh uh philosophy, right?
So it could, you know, there's the saying that
behind every living person, there's a dead philosopher and
and what they mean by that is that, you
know, it's not that, you know, everybody's read David
Hume or whatever, but those ideas do penetrate the
culture and affect us. And so I ideas that
philosophers from days of Yore have bestowed upon our
culture have have affected us growing up. So that's
one explanation. Another explanation is that there's something um
uh just uh intuitive about it that our brains
are constructed in a way which has us believe
if we will. Um But another explanation is that
there are situational factors that, that, that determine when
and in what context and for whom we believe
in free will. And this can be kind of
flexibly allocated. And iii I take from your question
that you're, you're pushing me towards the research that
we've done on these flexible uh free will beliefs.
Um WHICH I, I find, I, I think it's
a really interesting body of research. This is led
by uh Corey Clark who I think you have
spoken with. Uh AND, and for her. So behind
that living person, the dead philosopher is uh Nietzsche
uh who said, um who, who pointed out, you
know, among the various various forms of morality that
he didn't, he didn't like he said this, this,
this reprehensible idea of free will uh that people
flexibly uh uh deploy when they want to punish
somebody uh that we use it as a justification.
We say that that person has free will because
I want to punish them for what they did.
And I want, and, and in order to do
so, I need to be able to hold them
responsible. I need it to be their fault and
for it to be their fault, they have to
have been able to have done otherwise, which means
they have to have free will. And so in,
in the work that I've done with Corey and
uh others, uh we, we find that in all
these different circumstances when, when we make it such
that people really want to punish that other people,
that other person, they raise their level of free
will belief. So one of the best studies of
this in the, in the first package we did
on this was um Corey was teaching two classes,
two sections of a class. I don't know, it
was Corey was teaching. But anyway, somebody was teaching
two sections of the class. Um And in one
of them, uh she said that there was a
cheater on the last midterm. Uh And so riled
up everybody's, you know, oh no, that person screwing
us all over. And in the other condition, the
other section, she didn't say that. Um And then
she had all of them do a free will
uh scale. And in the case where people were
told that there was a cheater where people had
this sense, this desire to punish somebody to see,
to enforce the uh the retribution for moral wrongness.
Well, in that case, they believe in free world
more and there's a bunch of more controlled vignette
studies which, which share that.
But apart from these more situational aspects of whether
you want to punish someone or not, are there
individual differences in the degree to which people believe
in free will?
Um, THERE, there's some, uh, there's some personality correlates.
Uh, SO people hire and I think openness and
extroversion believe in free will more. Uh I think
there's no relationship with IQ or anything like that.
Um You do find in, in this potentially this,
this causal direction goes in the, in the opposite
direction. Uh People who are happier who have higher
life satisfaction tend to believe in free will more.
Um It might be that people who believe in
free will more uh as a consequence of are
happier. Um One of the more interesting and very
reliable group differences that we find is that conservatives
tend to believe in free will more than do
liberals and, and that sort of fits with some
of our stereotypes about uh what liberals and conservatives
believe, right? Conservatives tend to all be all about
the individual picking themselves up by their own bootstraps,
everybody's accountable, responsible, you know, go clean your room,
et cetera. Whereas liberals are like, oh no, everything
was systemic. Nothing. Is anybody any individuals doing. It's
all because of the structures that, that surround us.
So liberals tend to believe in free will less
and that comes up over and over again. Um
When, when those studies tend to be done, they
tend to use this. Um uh Well, you, you,
you find it with a variety of free will
measures, it tends to be in these very philosophical,
free will measures that are measuring people's philosophical commitments
to free will. But oftentimes when people read those,
they think about it in the political sphere. So
they think about it on constraints of freedom. So
that kind of what that liberal conservative difference that
we were talking about about the systemic versus individual
accountability.
And when it comes to that more political side
of things do people who believe in free will.
And I guess that in this particular case, it
would be more conservatives than liberals support economic inequality,
more. Is there any relationship there?
Yeah. So um conservatives tend to have uh more
tolerance for economic inequality than, than liberals do. Uh
AS you know, um interestingly though we have a,
an interesting paper that go that, that looks at
again unpublished. Uh THAT shows that um when you
look at uh liberals and conservatives, economic preferences, if
you look at uh economic preferences for different ways
that you could slice up the pie or grow
the pie or different goals that you have alleviating
poverty versus say reducing inequality versus just growing the
amount of wealth for everybody. Uh Both liberals and
conservatives by far their primary goal is to alleviate
poverty, but they don't think that about each other.
So liberals think that what conservatives are really after
is just growing the pie and increasing the amount
of money for the rich. And uh conservatives think
that liberals just want to reduce inequality when in
reality, both groups really just want to alleviate poverty.
But um where you were going with that was
that uh do we find that people with different,
that, that free will beliefs actually seem to affect
um a support for inequality? We tested that. Uh
WE tried to test that in a few different
ways and we never found uh overwhelming support for
that. Um So we, we did publish a paper
reporting our no results for that. So I, I,
I have no evidence to, to, to support that.
That's, that's the case.
By the way, do you think that studying a
free will or belief in free will through a
psychological perspective and really having this understanding that uh
the degree to which people believe in free will
varies according to the situation and their own, perhaps
individual characteristics? Do you think it has any bearing
on the free will debate and whether free will
itself is real or not or not at all?
No, not really. Uh Free will either exists or
it doesn't. And it's, I mean, ii, I don't
think the beliefs that all these like psychological consequences
of beliefs uh reflect on in the same way
that I think it, it, for religion. Right. You
know, religion and morality is a big, uh, topic
of research for mind, whether religion causes people to
be more moral or not, doesn't really have any
bearing on whether God exists.
No, no. But that's an interesting question because there
are many people who pick on these studies and
this kind of knowledge to say, oh, you see,
it's just people, uh, people just attribute free will
to other people when they want and when they,
when they don't, they don't do it. And so
free will doesn't exist at all. I mean, just
to support uh deterministic uh stance, let's say,
yeah, I think they're reasonably independent uh your belief
about free will and the actual existence of free
will where I guess you could have some, OK,
let's think about this. So, in I, I'm, I'm
extrapolating now from the example of religion. So one
of the things where the research, the psychological research
on religion would probably have a bearing on whether
uh God exists is that it can produce alternative
explanations for why we believe in God. Uh So,
um in that sense, it gives you uh the
belief in God could be over determined and I
guess free will belief could also be over determined,
it could exist and we could believe it, we
could believe it for reasons that are unrelated to
why it exists. I don't know. My sense is
that it, they're pretty, um, independent. Yeah.
So, and since we were just, uh, on the
topic of politics, uh, another thing that you've studied
and I wanted to ask you about is when
it comes to voting behavior and supporting specific political
candidates or leaders, do people always follow their own
self-interest? Because that's something that we hear a lot.
That, that's what people do. So,
yeah. Um, SO I guess it depends what you
mean by the self. Um People can expand, you
know what, before we tackle that, I just want
to mention one more thing about the, the free
will and politics thing because we did this very
big paper uh with, with Jim Everett. Um LOOKING
at uh those the two things about free will
that we talked about, right? So we talked about
this, this flexible um uh deployment of, of free
will attributions uh when people want to punish somebody.
And, and we talked then about the, the politics.
We combined both of those into that paper to
show that one of them, one of the a,
a driving factor, uh which is, I think what
we say in, in the paper. But what the
paper actually showed is one of the primary factors
about why those differences in free will beliefs exist
between liberals and conservatives is because uh in general,
conservatives tend to moralize a broader array of things
and thus want to punish more things. And as
a result, simply because they want to punish more
things, they want to hold people more accountable for
all these different moral transgressions. They ramp up their,
their belief in free will in order to, to
justify doing that. And, and we demonstrate this in
a few different ways. But one, I think the
most interesting is that when you look at topics
that, uh, liberals and conservatives, uh, uh, moralized to
the same degree, uh, they don't differ in terms
of their free will beliefs about that. And four
topics that, that liberals actually moralize to a greater
degree, uh then liberals will now believe in free
will uh more for those types of things. And
so again, it gets to that, that flexibility that
um yes, it's the case that by and large
conservatives believe in and believe in free will more.
But when it's inconvenient for them to do so,
and when it's convenient for liberals to do so,
they will flip.
OK. No, that's, that's very interesting. And, and so
just going back to the self-interest, self-interest uh aspect
here. So, uh I mean, do people actually in
their voting behavior and support for political candidates for
always follow their self-interest or not?
Uh N no. So um it seems that people
have people's uh group identities matter a lot to
them. And um oftentimes they will vote against their
obvious uh individualistic economic self interest, say uh in
order to uh uh maintain their loyalty to the
group or to make sure that their particular uh
cultural interests, uh broader cultural interests uh win out
over a competing group. Um So, um uh when,
when, so I guess this would argue against that,
that famous James Carville, um a point that it's
the economy stupid that people always vote with their,
with their pocketbooks and to some degree they do.
But we, we ran a study um Steve Rathje
and uh Simone uh Chanel um on, uh on
Trump voters, uh who had disappointing tax returns. And
we, we ran a longitudinal study which said, uh
what do you expect for your to get for
your tax return? Um And because this was when
there were some uh changes in the tax record,
I'm trying to remember what happened. There are all
these crazy things that happened during that, that those
years and, and one of the things was like
a rejiggering of the state taxes and the federal
taxes such that uh people's tax returns were gonna
change and, and their predictions were gonna be off.
And so we looked at Trump voters and asked,
uh, how important is, are your taxes to whom
you vote for? Um And what do you expect
for your taxes? Uh And then we followed them
up and for those people who had um disappointing
tax uh uh records, we asked, will you still
vote for, for Trump for re election? They said
yes. And then we asked, well, how much do
your taxes matter to your voting. And they said,
well, well, now much less. Uh, SO they, they
downgraded how important that factor was because that factor
wasn't really what was driving their voting intentions. They
just, they just kind of thought that maybe it
is, maybe I'm, I'm gonna care about things which
affect me, but really there, there are larger group
political commitments. Uh, uh I'm trying not to use
the word trumped their, their other concerns. So overrode
their other concerns. And when we published that it
took us a little while to publish it. Um
And by the time we did Trump was out
of office and Biden was in, we were like,
ok, well, I guess this will be a nice
historical record. It's not gonna be that relevant anymore,
but of course, now it seems like there's a
really competitive election going on and it might be
relevant all over.
So, uh I, I mean, there are many different
follow up questions that I uh interesting follow up
questions that I could ask you. But with our
time limit in mind, let me just ask you
one. So, uh does it make any sense to
think that perhaps since a political candidate usually proposes
several different kinds of policies and not just one
that let's say, even if people are voting against
their own self-interest when it comes to, for example,
uh taxation, they would be voting uh for their
own self-interest when it comes to, for example, it,
if that's something that they care more about, I
mean, that,
that's, that, yeah, that does make sense though. I
suspect there you also have uh the group commitment.
So for instance, if an individual was going to
be negatively, let's say an individual was going to
be positively affected by immigration or they were, they
were personally going to be positively affected by uh
a restriction and I don't know how that's gonna
work. So let's say a liberalizing of abortion laws.
Um uh I think that if their group uh
was going against that, so if it differentially affected
them versus their group and they were very uh
fused with their group, they had a lot of
uh uh uh uh their identity tied in with
the group. They would still go against the immigration
policy or the abortion policy that favored themselves the
most in order to, to stand by their group.
So sort of related to economics here. Why do
people tend to like rags to riches stories? And
I mean, do people tend to have more positive
views of those who become rich than those who
are born rich or not?
Yeah. So I'm interested and I'm interested in whether,
where you are Poland, right. Poland,
Portugal, Portugal,
you're in Portugal. I haven't thought this whole time.
Well, I'd be more interested in what, what people
in Poland would say, but I'm also interested in
what, what people in Portugal think in the US,
this is a really big thing. The rags to
stories are part of the American mythos. And, and
I, I've been marinated in the American Canadian culture
since I was born. Um, AND so to me
it seems like, well, people, uh, people love these
stories because they show that it's possible, uh, and
it shows that it's earned. Uh, AND so people
really want to think that both of those things
are true. It's system justifying to, to believe that
we live in a place where, uh, uh, we're,
we're not restricted by our accidents of birth. Um
And, uh, and so what you tend to see,
uh, in North America, we measured it in the
United States that yes, people, people much prefer, uh,
those who've become rich, uh, to those who are
born rich. Um, AND, and we have many, many
examples in the us of these great stories of
the Oprah Winfrey and, um, all these people, um,
Bill Clinton is another good example and when these
happen, which they occasionally do because it's a big
country. Uh, PEOPLE will like shout it from the
rooftops because they really wanna wanna believe that's possible.
Um, I was, uh, I'll tell you a story.
So I was, uh, uh, Thanksgiving dinner. No, fourth
of July. Uh, I was living in the U
SI was actually, um, in on vacation with, uh,
my girlfriend at the time with a bunch of
her friends. Um, Fourth of July. Uh, uh, WE
were in Mexico and we were having dinner and
I, I, there's this really cheesy thing that they
did, I guess these people really liked America and
they said, let's go around the table and everybody
say what they love about America. And there were
these two guys who were there, uh, both of
whom were like, they were, they were finance bros,
but they had very different backgrounds. So one had,
one came from money, uh, and um, had done
everything he could to lose it. He'd been like
a beach bum and whatever and he could not,
he just, he was just destined to stay rich.
Um And the other guy was the exact opposite.
So he was, uh he, he clawed his way
up from, from poverty. He was a poor student,
remedial student and he just like worked his ass
off to become rich. And uh we were going
around the table and it first came to that
guy, the guy who had become rich. Um And
he said, well, the great thing about America is
that anybody can make it here if you just
work hard enough. If you just work hard enough,
uh anybody can become rich, they can succeed like
I have, I don't know if he said like
I have. Um, AND then it went to the
next guy and he's just the, the rich guy
who's always been rich and he was just staring
at him and he goes, no, they can't. I've
looked at the data, people who are born rich,
stay rich and people are born poor, uh stay
poor on average. And his experiences suggested that and
um and so I tho those two different perspectives
are, are very interesting. Um What, what you, what
we find is that like I said, people tend
to like the became rich people better. What's interesting
is they also think that they became rich people.
The people who had clawed their way up from
poverty will be more sympathetic to and supportive of
the plight of the poor. Uh BECAUSE uh they
come, they, they have the uh a totally reasonable
conclusion that those people have been there. Um They
have more sympathy, the, the rich people, the, the
Rockefellers, whatever. They, they're out of touch, they don't
know what it's like to be poor. Why, why
would they want to help the poor? And what
we find in reality is the opposite. Um Even
though people perceive that things are gonna be like
that way. In reality, the people who were born
rich tend to be more supportive of the poor,
more sympathetic to the plight of the poor, more
willing to engage in redistribution than the people who
uh became rich. And the explanation we find is
that for those people who've clawed their way up,
they believe that it is possible for everybody because
they've done it themselves. And if they believe that
it's possible for everybody. They hold other people accountable
for it. Not having happened for them. Well, if
it hasn't happened for them, it's because they didn't
try hard enough. I tried hard enough and it
happened for me. Whereas the people like the, the
rich surfer guy, he's like, you know what? I,
I tried to lose money and I couldn't, and
people down there probably tried to make money and
they couldn't. So, it's not because of the, their
individual abilities or efforts or merit. It's because these
are structural things.
You know, where you see that a lot where
people who become rich are really, uh, against. II,
I don't know, poverty alleviation or more taxation or
something like that among, uh, immigrants who succeeded. I
mean, immigrants who succeeded. No, no one from their,
uh, original country likes them because they are just
annoying. They, they think that anyone can do it
and if you don't have it, it's because you
don't work hard enough or something like that. So,
yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. It's, uh, it's very important to pay
attention to the headwinds and the tailwinds that affect
people and how they go where they are.
Yeah. A and so does this relate in any
way to support for social welfare? I mean, is
it that people who became rich also tend to
support social welfare less than the ones who were
born rich?
You know what I'm not sure about that. I
think I think we saw some evidence for that
and we mentioned it in the paper that we
wrote. Certainly you can think of examples, but of
course, these are cherry picked examples, right? You think
of uh the Roosevelts, right? The Roosevelts came from
a very, very wealthy family, landowning New York family.
Uh AND they were some of the more progressive
presidents. Um But I think you could probably come
up with counterexamples of that pretty easily. So uh
let's not quote me on any of that. Um
The data out there, I just can't remember what
they say.
And so um when it comes to causal attributions
for poverty, do they relate to attitudes towards inequality?
And by and by the way, what tend to
be the, the more common causal attributions here
for, for poverty?
Yeah. No,
for poverty. Yeah. Yeah. So um in America, uh
people tend to believe um more so than I
would have suspected. They tend to believe that that
the poor are responsible for being poor. Um WHICH
is, um which is interesting because they're, they're often
given a lot of evidence to the contrary. Um
MAYBE that's in the media that I'm exposed to.
But uh uh they believe that that more than
other places and they believe that more than I
would have suspected in the US, by the way,
in, in Korea. This is just some new data
that um the lead author on that uh former
student of mine, Hyun Jin Koo uh collected. Uh
SHE found that in South Korea, uh people also
have this preference uh for the no people also
believe that they became rich uh would be more
sympathetic to the poor. But unlike in America, where
people prefer to be the became rich in South
Korea, people prefer to be the born rich and
she suspects and this is what she's measuring currently
is that that's due to a sense of uh
social class fatalism. So in Korea, they have this
metaphor of being born with either a golden spoon
or a clay spoon. And so you're a gold
spoon or a clay spoon type of person. And
people want to be the people who are born
with the gold spoon because that, that stays with
you, regardless of whether your economics changes, you're a
gold spoon person or, or a clay spoon person.
And I think one of the things that uh
the American ethos is about is that, well, nobody
is essentially their class. Uh THAT America is a
place which, which doesn't have those essential characteristics and,
and, and you don't have to be a clay
spoon your whole life if you were born.
So, I mean, if people tend to believe that
uh people who are poor, it's because of their
own, it's their own fault. It's because of the
bad decisions they made. They also tend to be
more uh accepting of inequality in their society,
right? That's Right. Yeah, that's right. So um uh
yeah, so um we, we see that across countries.
So places where there's a greater uh uh belief
in um uh where there's a greater belief in
social mobility, there's a greater tolerance for inequality. And
in fact, that's a greater predictor of the level
of inequality of, of the support for inequality than
the level of inequality in that country itself. Um
So when people believe that you're able to get
out of your position, uh they're gonna be less
willing to help you for not having done it.
So to get into the last topic, what is
the moralization of effort? I mean, what, what is
it really about? And what do these plays of
effort signal socially to other people?
Yeah. So this is uh work I want to
keep giving credit to, to all the, the first
authors and students on this. So this is a
work by, um it was led by Jared Sneer.
Um It's based on some, some other work um
as well by, by various researchers. But basically what
we found there is that, um even for people
who don't produce, uh um more than somebody else,
somebody who's putting a lot of effort into their
uh behaviors, whether it's at work, whether it's in
their hobbies, uh they're seen as a more moral
person. Um So if you see the, the actual,
the um the uh anecdote I give about this
is that one of the co authors on the
paper. Paul Piff, he's a good friend of mine.
Um, AND he, he's a runner. He, he runs
in the movie. He's a jogger. He's a jogger.
Let's be, let's be real. Um, AND he, uh,
when I, when I met him II, I moved,
I moved to this when I was UC Irvine,
he was a UC Irvine and I kept hearing
he would go on these jogs and I find
people who jog kind of annoying because they're all
like holier than now and whatever. Um But then
one day I saw him jogging and I expected
when he was jogging, he just be like, you
know, like smiling at the beautiful Californian sun and
just like taking it easy and just being in
like, you know, this Mr perfect kind of guy,
but he was like hobbling over, he was like
one leg wasn't working and it was dripping in
sweat and he had this look of just agony
on his face and it made me have that
much more respect for him because he was putting
in that much more effort uh to, you know,
a task which, which didn't really help anybody. Um
It was just for him. Uh IT has no
bearing on, on uh harming or helping anybody else,
but it did make him seem like a, a
more moral person for some reason. Um And so
the theory behind it is that we are constantly
uh trying to figure out amongst the market for
people, uh, who is going to be a good
cooperator, who's going to be a good moral person.
We want to surround ourselves with people who are
dependable, trustworthy, uh, moral people. And so we're looking
for any cue that actually would, would suggest that
somebody is like that somebody would be a good
cooper partner. And effort is a really good one.
SO effort, uh, is, um, tells you whether if
you needed help, if you needed somebody to actually
do something for you, that that's somebody who's willing
to invest effort into things. And in a way,
potentially, we don't have evidence for this. But in
a way, you could imagine that the people who
are willing to invest effort into the most meaningless
things are the people who are even that much
more trustworthy because they would put in effort to,
uh, to, to whatever whatever you needed them, uh
for not just things which have economic uh benefits.
And so we showed in a number of different,
um studies that, yeah, so people who uh are
shown. So like if you have two widget makers
and they produce the same amount of widgets, the
one for whom it's hard works really hard. That
person is seen as more moral and you'd want
them as a, as a partner, you want them
as a trust partner. Uh More than the person
who, who, who it comes easily to
do, do you like soccer?
I don't like soccer. I mean, I, I have
nothing against soccer but
no, no, no, no, no. But, but I, I'm
mentioning that because one very famous example of how
people look at effort and how they moralize it
is the debate between who's the best soccer player
ever. Cristiano Ronaldo or Messi because since Cristiano Ronaldo
is always on social media, advertising his work ethic
people and many, many people out there tend to
think that he's the best soccer player ever because
he puts in more effort than Messi, which by
the way is wrong because Messi has also improved
his play through the years. So he trains a
lot. But anyway, that's just an example.
I mean, another good example of this uh is
in basketball with uh Kobe Bryant and, and Shaquille
o'neal because Shaq was born with these amazing natural
gifts and Kobe was like the hardest working person
in the NBA. And, and you really, if you,
uh if I were to try to pick somebody
who's, I, I mean, I guess Kobe had those
sexual assault allegations, but, you know, he seemed, I
guess the, the work ethic does make him seem
seem like a more moral uh person. Um Yeah,
and, and I think there's probably many examples of
that and I think we, we do venerate people
who are seen as hard working. And I was
thinking even, you know, even some of these, these
memes or these trends that take off on social
media. Uh I was thinking about this cold plunge
thing. You know, these people who like wake up
in the morning, they jump in a, like a
bunch of ice cubes. Um I don't know if
that helps people, but I imagine that people, people
venerate the people who go through that simply because
it's like a grit your teeth and bear, it's
hard to do And it seems to just have
this automatic, I respect that person. I think that
person is good because they're doing this really hard
thing. Uh, I think we tend to do that.
I think we tend to, to think of people
who are, um, just willing to put in a
lot of effort for things. We see them as,
as very, as very moral. There's an interesting paper,
uh, in behavioral brain science, Leo Fushi was the,
I don't know how to pronounce his last name.
I hope that's right. Uh, WAS the lead author
on it, which was looking at this idea of
a Puritan, a puritan moralizing that their argument was
that the reason why people moralize these things, which
tend not to have, uh, uh, victims or beneficiaries,
um, like, uh, eating too much or, uh, drinking,
gambling, all these kinds of things. Their argument was
that, well, those things lead people to have less
self control. But I think, I think that's insightful.
Uh, BUT I think a small tweak on that
is that those things signal who has high self
control and who doesn't. And so if you see
somebody who's engaging in, uh, eating too much or,
uh, is, is giving into gambling too much or
whatever, that's a signal to you that, well, if
you really needed them, you don't know that they'll
be able to come through because they, they indulge,
they can't, they don't have the self control to,
um, uh to, to um uh to, to, to,
to, to rein in their behavior when, when they
really need to. And um, so I gave a,
a talk, I give a uh a talk on
this effort, moralization thing was up on youtube. And
um, of course, I, I made the mistake of
reading the comments, um which were generally positive, but
then 111 comment which I can't forget was like
uh talking about. Um, YEAH, uh all this uh
effort important for self control. Uh You should know
that self control is also relating to uh hair
grooming, bro. It was like accusing me of being
unkempt. Uh WHICH I guess I am. Um And
it made me realize that even those types of
cues, right? Like being clean, shaven, well kept a
well groomed people. That's a, that's a another demonstration
of uh fastidiousness, discipline, uh self control, I guess.
Uh HARD work, I guess it's hard to, to
stay well groomed. Um All these cues, we constantly
surveying the social landscape to find these cues of
who's gonna be a dependable partner and then we
moralize everything. Uh, THAT, that is, is such a
queue.
We, well, perhaps that would be another reason why
so many people nowadays advertise on social media, they're
going to the gym, I guess.
Yes. Exactly. Yeah. That's right. It's a, it's a,
it's a great example of effort, moralization. It doesn't
help anybody. I guess it may be eases some
pressure on the health care system. But, uh, yeah,
I don't know, I think people respect people who
do that more, uh, for better or worse.
But, but when it comes to the more rational
aspects of this, I mean, is it actually rational
to value effort for efforts sake, even if it
is sometimes unproductive or, or at least doesn't reach,
doesn't help reaching the goals that we have in
mind.
Well, it depends on what you mean by those
goals. Right. So, so I think that if I
think that we are constantly, uh, whether we like
to think of it or, or, or, or not
because it seems inauthentic but we are constantly trying
to send out signals to other people, uh, to
show that we're the type of people that we
want to be wanted or something like that or,
or, or desired as, as good cooper partners, even
to our own friends and partners, we want to
show, uh, commitment, trustworthiness, all these kinds of things.
And so when we engage in this seemingly at
least economically unproductive effort. It is productive in this
other sphere. It is productive for signaling to other
people that we are uh reliable partners. Uh WHICH
I think is an important thing to do. I
think. So, in that sense, it does have whether
this is the reason that we do it uh
consciously or not, it does have that sort of
deep rationality to it. Um Yeah. Uh I think
one of the problems comes when it pops up
in uh contexts which are then removed from that
signal, right? So, because we venerate hard work so
much, we now construct an entire ll labor system
that rewards hard work uh Even when it's economically
unproductive. Um And it's not serving that interpersonal process.
So if a boss is, if we're trying to
show that we are the hardest working person in
the office, uh when that doesn't accomplish the interpersonal
benefits and it doesn't accomplish the economic goals of
the company. Uh Then it's just draining people's time
that could be spent doing other things.
A and so just one last question, does this
phenomenon of moralization of effort connect in any way
to support for social welfare?
So that's a good question. That's uh uh a
project that uh Jared, the, the lead author has
wanted to do. Uh We haven't gotten to it
yet. Um Right now, you, you see examples of
that all the time that people uh uh are
reticent to give social welfare when it's not connected
to work. Even if the work doesn't produce anything,
people want to see people work. They don't, they
get turned off by, uh, people not working because
they perceive it as laziness, which makes you not
respect the person, not like the person, not think
of the person, moral, not think of the person
is deserving. And as a result, probably you're less
willing to extend uh social welfare to them. So
again, back to those attributions that we talked about
earlier, those really matter because those determine uh what
you feel about the people uh to whom you
would be um either donating money to or, or
giving taxes for.
And I would imagine, I mean, this just came
to my mind that in the case, for example,
of homeless people, then there would be many social
signals in their case that would signal to people
that I they are not putting in the effort
because they are on the street. They are probably
not working, they are not groomed again that bit
from a few minutes ago. So
all of that. Yeah. And, and similarly, um you
know, they might have uh here in Vancouver a
lot of uh drug addiction problems. Uh So they
have that cue as well. Uh So all those
things which people might attribute to just being low
quality uh social partners, even if that person is
not going to be a social partner to you.
So that's a good example of a misfiring, right?
Because you then make all these attributions, the, the
person you don't like them, you see them as
immoral, uh, because they would be a bad social
partner, but you aren't evaluating them to be a
social partner. You're evaluating them as to whether they're
gonna be the recipient of help.
Mhm. Per, perhaps that's also why we evolved psychology
misfiring in our huge societies where we no longer
interact just with 150 people where we know everyone
around.
Right. Yeah, that's right. And, and um uh you
know, I've, I've written a couple of papers on
this idea that um the environmental change that we've
undergone in the last 20 years, moving from the
real world to a world that's more like this
uh where we look at screens, we interact with
many, many strangers, millions of people that environmental change
from the real world to a virtual world to
an online world is probably bigger than the environmental
change that we went through 10, 12,000 years ago
when we moved from being uh nomadic people to
sedentary city dwellers. That was a big change. It
had all these uh uh cultural evolutionary consequences. This
one might be actually bigger and happening way faster.
Great. So let's wrap up the interview here, Doctor
Chri. And uh do, would you like to tell
people where they can find you when you work
on the internet.
Oh, good question. Uh uh Google scholar. You can
find my work there. Uh Google scholar. Uh I'm
also on Twitter um at Azim Sharif. Uh Yeah.
Yeah. Oh, and I have a website but I
don't really update it very much. That's Shari lab.com.
Really Google scholar, research, Gator. Probably the places you
can get papers.
Yeah. And of course, I will also leave the
link to our first interview in the description of
this one. So thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
always a pleasure to talk with you.
Great to see you again. Take care.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer, Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K. Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s
friends, David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego
and Jan Punter Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba, Adam
Hunt, Pavla Stassi na Me, Gary G Alman, Sam
Ofri and YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan
Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander, Abert Liam Dan Biar,
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stein, Tom Veg and
Bernard N Corti Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine
and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.